`CONTRIBUTING.md` for PR Process (#9)
ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template: CONTRIBUTING.md

> # Contributing To A Model Deployment Repository

Reviewer: We also want users that simply want to modify the source and do a test-run to read this document even if they don't intend to contribute source code.

Author: Updated header in https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template/pull/9/commits/ba6dd8d3e353f6b3dd9c8efe9207f95af6f6ac51

This model deployment repository makes use of the [spack](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build and deployment functionality enabled by the [access-nri/build-cd repository](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/build-cd).

This allows automated Release and Prerelease `spack` builds of climate models, informed by this repositories `spack.yaml` file and `config` directory.

In a nutshell, the commits on Pull Requests to this model deployment repository generate isolated Prerelease builds of a climate model on HPCs. When these are merged, an official Release build is created.

FIXME: Add in the image of the process

## The `spack.yaml` File

> The `spack.yaml` file at the root of the repository is a file understood by `spack`, that essentially constrain the versions and features of dependencies required for a build of a given climate model. It is a set of abstract constraints that is _concretized_ into a single set of dependencies at build time, creating a `spack.lock` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `spack.yaml` file at the root of the repository is a file understood by `spack`. It constrains the versions and features (variants) of dependencies required to build a given climate model. It is a set of abstract constraints that is _concretized_ into a single set of dependencies at build time, creating a `spack.lock` file.
```

> It is similar to other package managers abstract/concrete paradigm, like `npm`s `package.json`/`package.lock` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is similar to `npm`s `package.json`/`package.lock` files.
```

More information on the `spack.yaml` file itself can be found on [ACCESS-NRI's devdocs](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/dev-docs/wiki/Spack#the-spackyaml-file-spec-file).

## The `config` Directory

The `config` directory at the root of this repository contains a single `versions.json` file, which allows customisation of both the version of [`access-nri/spack`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack) that the model will be deployed on, as well as the version of [`access-nri/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) that will source the ACCESS-NRI spack packages recipes.

> ## The PR Process

Reviewer: What we require is a document that demonstrates what the user needs to do if they wish to modify a package's source code. e.g. The user modifies MOM5 source code, creates a branch, pushes it to ACCESS-NRI's MOM5 repo. Then they have to modify `spack.yaml` and change the MOM5 version to `git.<branch>`, etc.

Author: Maybe it would be worth having a chat about this in a call.

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest changing the title to something like "Updating the Model" and saying underneath: "Updating the model requires a pull request (PR) process".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Changing the Model via Pull Request (PR)
```

> The `config` directory at the root of this repository contains a single `versions.json` file, which allows customisation of both the version of [`access-nri/spack`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack) that the model will be deployed on, as well as the version of [`access-nri/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) that will source the ACCESS-NRI spack packages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `config` directory at the root of this repository contains a single `versions.json` file, which allows customisation of both the version of [`access-nri/spack`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack) that the model will be deployed on, as well as the version of [`access-nri/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) that will source the ACCESS-NRI spack packages recipes.
```

# Creating Pre/Releases For A Model Deployment Repository

> This model deployment repository makes use of the [spack](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build and deployment functionality enabled by the [access-nri/build-cd repository](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/build-cd).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This model deployment repository makes use of the [spack](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build and deployment functionality enabled by the [ACCESS-NRI/build-cd repository](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/build-cd).
```

> This allows automated Release and Prerelease `spack` builds of climate models, informed by this repositories `spack.yaml` file and `config` directory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This allows automated Release and Prerelease `spack` builds of climate models, informed by this repository's `spack.yaml` file and `config` directory.
```

In a nutshell, the commits on Pull Requests to this model deployment repository generate isolated Prerelease builds of a climate model on HPCs. When these are merged, an official Release build is created.

FIXME: Add in the image of the process

## The `spack.yaml` File

> The `spack.yaml` file at the root of the repository is a file understood by `spack`. It constrains the versions and features (variants) of dependencies required to build a given climate model. It is a set of abstract constraints that is _concretized_ into a single set of dependencies at build time, creating a `spack.lock` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `spack.yaml` file at the root of the repository is a file understood by `spack`. It constrains the versions and features (variants) of dependencies required to build a given climate model. It is a set of abstract constraints that are _concretized_ into a single set of dependencies at build time, creating a `spack.lock` file.
```

It is similar to `npm`s `package.json`/`package.lock` files.

More information on the `spack.yaml` file itself can be found on [ACCESS-NRI's devdocs](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/dev-docs/wiki/Spack#the-spackyaml-file-spec-file).

## The `config` Directory

The `config` directory at the root of this repository contains a single `versions.json` file, which allows customisation of both the version of [`access-nri/spack`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack) that the model will be deployed on, as well as the version of [`access-nri/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) that will source the ACCESS-NRI spack packages recipes.

## The PR Process

> 1. The first step is to create a branch off the model deployment repositories `main`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. The first step is to create a branch from the model deployment repository `main` branch.
```

2. [Modifications](#modifications-to-the-spackyaml-file) can be made to the `spack.yaml`/`config/versions.json` files as applicable - update versions of packages, add variants, etc.
3. Once a commit has been made that you want to build, open a PR into `main` in the model deployment repository, and the CI/CD infrastructure will attempt to build.
    * If there are CI errors in the build, they will be reported via GitHubs Pull Request Checks. More information on them is available by clicking the failing test.
    * If the CI checks succeed, a bot will comment on what is being deployed on the open pull request.
    * Finally, GitHubs Environment Deployment dialogue will show on the Pull Request as a yellow 'In Progress' label. Once it shows a green 'Active' (or grey 'Inactive') deployment, you can use the modules specified in the above comment - they should look something like `MODEL/prX-Y` for the `MODEL`s `X`th PR and `Y`th deployment.

> 4. Further commits can be put onto the Pull Request to create more builds, without removing the earlier ones, allowing side-by-side testing. For example, adding an extra commit will allow use of the module `MODEL/prX-(Y+1)` once it's deployed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Further commits can be pushed onto the Pull Request branch to create more builds, without removing the earlier ones, allowing side-by-side testing. For example, adding an extra commit will allow use of the module `MODEL/prX-(Y+1)` once it's deployed.
```

5. When the Pull Request is closed, whether it is merged or not, the Prereleases **will be removed**, but can be recreated at your leisure by installing the `spack.yaml`/`spack.lock` artifact at the specified commit on your own instance, or by creating a new Pull Request.
6. If the Pull Request is merged, it will create an official ACCESS-NRI released build of the given model, with an associated GitHub Release.

## Modifications To The `spack.yaml` File

Below are some real-world examples of how to modify the `spack.yaml` file.

### Example Modification Workflow of `ACCESS-OM2`s `MOM5` Package

In this example, we are using the `ACCESS-OM2` deployment repositories `spack.yaml` from [this commit](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml). We are also modifying one of ACCESS-OM2's model components, namely [ACCESS-NRI/MOM5](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM5). This model component is available in our [`ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) as the package `mom5`.

> 1. We clone and make our modifications to the model component `ACCESS-NRI/MOM5`, which we tag with [`dev_2024.08.14`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM5/releases/tag/dev_2024.08.14).

Reviewer 2: Can probably get rid of the "We .." at the beginning of all the instructions.

Reviewer 2: Also I'm not sure it would be normal to tag a development branch. I think it is more normal to use a branch name.

Author: Done the 'we' stuff in https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template/pull/9/commits/8bc3cf1fa5a2c6018b1298efa403d236ec9fd545

Author: The issue with the branch name thing is that if they want to get the latest `HEAD` changes of the component on the module, they have a either force a build with `git commit --allow-empty -m "Retriggering build of COMPONENTs BRANCH"` or a comment in the `spack.yaml` noting the commit of the component branch reference. 

Honestly, I might just add the `!redeploy` ChatOps command :D

Author: See https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/build-cd/issues/173 for a potential ChatOps command that could do this.

Reviewer 2: I'm a fan of the ChatOps option, but in the meantime we definitely don't want to force people to also add tags.

2. We then create a branch in the model deployment repository `ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2` - such as `update_mom5_dev_build`.

> 3. We verify that the versions of `spack` and `spack-packages` in [`config/versions.json`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/config/versions.json) are as we want them.

Reviewer 2: I think the spack and spack-packages versions are unlikely to need to be changed by most users. I think this could be a note below the main instructions.

Author: Done in https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template/pull/9/commits/8bc3cf1fa5a2c6018b1298efa403d236ec9fd545

# Creating Pre/Releases For A Model Deployment Repository

This model deployment repository makes use of the [spack](https://spack.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) build and deployment functionality enabled by the [access-nri/build-cd repository](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/build-cd).

This allows automated Release and Prerelease `spack` builds of climate models, informed by this repository's `spack.yaml` file and `config` directory.

In a nutshell, the commits on Pull Requests to this model deployment repository generate isolated Prerelease builds of a climate model on HPCs. When these are merged, an official Release build is created.

FIXME: Add in the image of the process

## The `spack.yaml` File

The `spack.yaml` file at the root of the repository is a file understood by `spack`. It constrains the versions and features (variants) of dependencies required to build a given climate model. It is a set of abstract constraints that are _concretized_ into a single set of dependencies at build time, creating a `spack.lock` file.

> It is similar to `npm`s `package.json`/`package.lock` files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is similar to `npm`'s `package.json`/`package.lock` files.
```

More information on the `spack.yaml` file itself can be found on [ACCESS-NRI's devdocs](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/dev-docs/wiki/Spack#the-spackyaml-file-spec-file).

## The `config` Directory

The `config` directory at the root of this repository contains a single `versions.json` file, which allows customisation of both the version of [`access-nri/spack`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack) that the model will be deployed on, as well as the version of [`access-nri/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) that will source the ACCESS-NRI spack packages recipes.

## The PR Process

> 1. The first step is to create a branch from the model deployment repository `main` branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The first step is to create a branch from the model deployment repository's `main` branch.
```

2. [Modifications](#modifications-to-the-spackyaml-file) can be made to the `spack.yaml`/`config/versions.json` files as applicable - update versions of packages, add variants, etc.
3. Once a commit has been made that you want to build, open a PR into `main` in the model deployment repository, and the CI/CD infrastructure will attempt to build.
    * If there are CI errors in the build, they will be reported via GitHubs Pull Request Checks. More information on them is available by clicking the failing test.
    * If the CI checks succeed, a bot will comment on what is being deployed on the open pull request.

>     * Finally, GitHubs Environment Deployment dialogue will show on the Pull Request as a yellow 'In Progress' label. Once it shows a green 'Active' (or grey 'Inactive') deployment, you can use the modules specified in the above comment - they should look something like `MODEL/prX-Y` for the `MODEL`s `X`th PR and `Y`th deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * Finally, GitHubs Environment Deployment dialogue will show on the Pull Request as a yellow 'In Progress' label. Once it shows a green 'Active' (or grey 'Inactive') deployment, you can use the modules specified in the above comment - they should look something like `MODEL/prX-Y` for the `MODEL`'s `X`th PR and `Y`th deployment.
```

4. Further commits can be pushed onto the Pull Request branch to create more builds, without removing the earlier ones, allowing side-by-side testing. For example, adding an extra commit will allow use of the module `MODEL/prX-(Y+1)` once it's deployed.

> 5. When the Pull Request is closed, whether it is merged or not, the Prereleases **will be removed**, but can be recreated at your leisure by installing the `spack.yaml`/`spack.lock` artifact at the specified commit on your own instance, or by creating a new Pull Request.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. When the Pull Request is closed, whether it is merged or not, the Prereleases **will be removed**, but can be recreated by installing the `spack.yaml`/`spack.lock` artifact at the specified commit on your own instance, or by creating a new Pull Request.
```

6. If the Pull Request is merged, it will create an official ACCESS-NRI released build of the given model, with an associated GitHub Release.

## Modifications To The `spack.yaml` File

Below are some real-world examples of how to modify the `spack.yaml` file.

> ### Example Modification Workflow of `ACCESS-OM2`s `MOM5` Package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Example Modification Workflow of `ACCESS-OM2`'s `MOM5` Package
```

> In this example, we are using the `ACCESS-OM2` deployment repositories `spack.yaml` from [this commit](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml). We are also modifying one of ACCESS-OM2's model components, namely [ACCESS-NRI/MOM5](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM5). This model component is available in our [`ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) as the package `mom5`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, we are using the `ACCESS-OM2` deployment repository's `spack.yaml` from [this commit](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml). We are also modifying one of ACCESS-OM2's model components, namely [ACCESS-NRI/MOM5](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM5). This model component is available in our [`ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/spack-packages) as the package `mom5`.
```

1. Clone and make modifications to the model component `ACCESS-NRI/MOM5`, which is tagged with [`dev_2024.08.14`](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/MOM5/releases/tag/dev_2024.08.14).
2. Create a branch in the model deployment repository `ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2` - such as `update_mom5_dev_build`.

> 3. Make modifications to the `spack.yaml` file:

Reviewer 2: Can we inline the modified file, or at least the snippets that are changed? Would it make sense to display as a `diff`? Is that something most users would understand?

Author: Done in https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template/pull/9/commits/9ecbc66e42e0e2c9c8d8eca55bd78ab4a6d94b60

      * Since this is a minor change, just bump the minor version. Hence, it is updated to `@git.2024.03.1`.
      * When that version is bumped, the [associated module projection](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L51) also needs to be updated to `{name}/2024.03.1` as well.
   * Secondly, bump the version of `mom5` that was updated earlier, to the `dev_2024.08.14` tag set in the model component repository:
      * Update the version of the [`mom5` package](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L15) to `@git.dev_2024.08.14`.
      * Also update the [associated module projection](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L53) to `{name}/VERSION-{hash:7}` - in this case, `{name}/dev_2024.08.14-{hash:7}`. The `{hash:7}` is used so the module doesn't conflict with other versions.
4. Now that the modifications are complete, commit the changes and open a Pull Request in `ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2` into `main`, even if it's just a dev build.

> 5. The CI/CD kicks off, and a comment is added by `github-actions[bot]` saying that the build is deploying, and once the deployment is 'Active', the module specified in the comment is available on the HPC and is `module use/load`able. Excellent!

Reviewer: Do you want to show an example of a comment that was generated? Is it worth having a Point 6 on logging into Gadi and running the commands?

Author: > Do you want to show an example of a comment that was generated? 

Yep, will add an example. 

> Is it worth having a Point 6 on logging into Gadi and running the commands?

I suppose so, but what happens in future when we have multiple deployment targets? I think I'd rather keep the instructions general to some HPC rather than a specific one

Author: Done the example in https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/model-deployment-template/pull/9/commits/3b85309a19b45bcd7779340bea3011388504ad9e, will wait for feedback on the other point.

Reviewer 2: > Is it worth having a Point 6 on logging into Gadi and running the commands?

Feels like a stretch for this document, and would add more delays to getting it merged. I think it is something a hive docs version could address later.

      * Since this is a minor change, just bump the minor version. Hence, it is updated to `@git.2024.03.1`.
      * When that version is bumped, the [associated module projection](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L51) also needs to be updated to `{name}/2024.03.1` as well.
   * Secondly, update the version of the `mom5` package that was updated earlier, to the `development` branch set in the model component repository:
      * Update the version of the [`mom5` package](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L15) to `@git.development`.
      * Also update the [associated module projection](https://github.com/ACCESS-NRI/ACCESS-OM2/blob/47bc7bf979c1dfa12a24272cb739117abc50d7ca/spack.yaml#L53) to `{name}/VERSION-{hash:7}` - in this case, `{name}/development-{hash:7}`. The `{hash:7}` is used so the module doesn't conflict with other versions.

>    * The end result should looks something like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * The end result should be something like this (note this is a [unified diff](https://linuxhandbook.com/diff-command/#example-3-diff-in-“unified”-context-withu) showing the original and changes that were required):
```
